# 20.440_project
20.440 Project Spring 2024
by Julian Rojo & Marieke De Bock
Regression Model for Effect of Different Salmonella Enterica Strains on Dendritic Cells

Salmonella enterica is a gram-negative bacterium responsible for a range of acute pathologies, including typhoid fever (caused by typhoidal Salmonella) and gastroenteritis (caused by nontyphoidal Salmonella). Despite this bacterium’s continuing impact on global health, poor treatment options exist. The dendritic cell (DC) is a critical player in the immune system that Salmonella hijacks to survive and propagate. We obtained a dataset with dual RNA sequencing data on monocyte-derived DCs (MoDCs) infected with nontyphoidal and typhoidal Salmonella. The authors of this dataset showed that infected MoDCs increase iron intake to create reactive oxygen intermediates (ROI) and reactive nitrogen intermediates (RNI) to kill the bacterium. In response, noninvasive nontyphoidal Salmonella (nNTS) evades MoDC killing by upregulating genes that promote increased iron uptake by the bacterium, ultimately decreasing the amount of ROI and RNI that can be produced. Similarly, invasive nontyphoidal Salmonella (iNTS) inhibits the uptake of extracellular iron. On the other hand, typhoidal Salmonella (TS) upregulates genes that make it resistant to ROI and RNI. The distinct responses in each serotype motivated us to create multiple regression models that could relate changes in DC gene expression to changes in bacterial gene expression. We hypothesized that this model could be used to predict how immune pressures impact new serotypes and allow them to survive; this insight has the potential to identify genes that could be targeted with antibiotics. Our best model, which had a root mean squared error of ~26%, was a linear regression model trained on both nNTS and TS to predict changes in the gene expression of iNTS. Future work should focus on increasing the dataset size to increase model accuracy, especially with both typhoidal and non-typhoidal strains.
